---
layout: post
title:  "Steve Vai"
date:   2015-09-13 19:14:46
artist: steve-vai
image: steve-vai
category: discover
author: anthony-garone
permalink: discover/steve-vai
techniques:
  - virtuosity
  - composition
  - multiple genres
  - time signatures
---
## Thanks To Our Sponsors!

Special thanks to [Cory Berg at Software++](http://softwareplusplus.com) and to [Carl King Creative](http://carlkingdom.com) for sponsoring this interview.

Cory is a software development and management expert who's written a fantastic book called [Software++: Must-Have Skills for Engineers](http://www.amazon.com/Software-Must-Have-Skills-Engineers-ebook/dp/B00U4ZRQC6). There are a lot of software people I've met via Make Weird Music and Guitar Circle.

Carl is an expert filmmaker, author, and [former musician](/discover/carl-king). His book, [So, You're a Creative Genius... Now What?](http://www.amazon.com/Youre-Creative-Genius-Now-What/dp/1932907920), has been a huge inspiration for me and many others. He filmed this interview and provided lots of great equipment and expertise.

## A Little About Steve Vai

Steve Vai is a forward-thinking, virtuosic guitarist based in Los Angeles. He started his career in music with Frank Zappa in 1979.

## What's So Weird?

A lot of Steve's work makes use of the following weird music techniques:

- Time Signatures
- Composition
- Virtuosity

## Why I Care

In 1996, I heard an instrumental guitar song on the radio (!!) that had the most incredible guitar playing I&#8217;d ever heard. It opened my eyes to new potential on the instrument and I had no idea that level of technicality, virtuosity, and musicality. The DJ said, &#8220;That was Steve Vai with his track <em>Juice</em> off his new album, <em>Alien Love Secrets</em>.&#8221; Immediately, I scrounged up all the cash and change I could, went to Best Buy (when they actually had a good selection of music for sale), and bought it for $9.99.

Little did I know, Steve Vai was--and still is--one of the most innovative, inspired, and ambitious guitarists in the industry. <a href="/discover/frank-zappa">Frank Zappa</a> credited him with &#8220;impossible guitar parts&#8221; as the &#8220;stunt guitarist&#8221; of his band between 1980 and 1982. Between solo releases, he played with Alcatrazz, John Lydon&#8217;s Public Image Ltd, David Lee Roth, Alice Cooper, Whitesnake, and Ozzy Osbourne.

His solo releases through the 1990s were mind-blowing. <em>Passion and Warfare</em>, <em>Alien Love Secrets</em>, and <em>Fire Garden</em> were in my CD player for months. I bought every used guitar magazine and tablature book I could find to learn those songs. There are enough weird music techniques in these albums for decades of worthwhile study.

Through Steve&#8217;s music (especially sheet music), I learned an incredible amount about time signatures, composition, instrumentation, key modulations, humor, crossing multiple genres, experimentation, and virtuosity. He&#8217;s been a huge inspiration to my own guitar and composition techniques.

Steve Vai has had a long, incredible history of trailblazing in the instrumental rock genre and he shows no sign of stopping. Every album features intricately planned and executed melodic explorations, rapid-fire blues-based riffage, and new sounds like you&#8217;ve never heard out of a guitar. His discography covers all sorts of ground from straightforward blues/rock to completely whacked-out alien noise.

## What You Should Hear First

If you&#8217;ve never listened to Steve, here&#8217;s where to start:

- For groundbreaking guitar rock: <em>Passion and Warfare</em>
- For completely weird, Zappa-esque outlandishness: <em>Flexable</em>
- For compositional complexity: <em>Fire Garden</em>

If you&#8217;re looking for an album with one genre/version of Steve, you&#8217;re not going to find it. He sticks to no particular genre and offers something for everyone. My favorite pieces of his are the extended-length exploratory pieces, like <em>Freak Show Excess</em>, <em>Fire Garden Suite</em>, <em>The Story of Light</em>, and <em>Lucky Charms</em>.

And if you&#8217;re looking for something REALLY out there, check out his performance of <em>Fire Strings</em> with the Tokyo Metropolitan Symphony Orchestra.
